thanks for tuning in to this episode of
help theory sponsored by our friends at
athletic greens we've got an awesome
offer for you guys in the description
below so be sure to check that out
in today's episode with dr. ken berry we
discuss why your doctor is lying to you
the importance of eating ancestrally why
the u.s. nutrition guidelines are
absolute garbage and the efficacy of the
carnivore diet everybody welcome to
health theory
today's guest is dr. ken berry he's a
board certified family physician who has
treated over 25,000 unique patients from
newborns to centenarians and everything
in between
he's also the author of the
controversial book lies my doctor told
me a book he became obsessed with
writing after realizing that much of
what he'd been taught in medical school
about nutrition was just flat-out wrong
after years of research and getting his
own health in order through a bespoke
ketogenic approach he began challenging
the medical establishment and trying to
separate fact from fiction and help his
patients achieve optimal health I want
to talk about is how this all started
for you being a doctor that himself was
overweight like what did that trigger in
you and how did that start this whole
ball rolling so I was raised in a very
poor family but a very proud family and
the parable that I grew up hearing was
the parable of the preacher who was
caught in the bar and when the
congregation said what are you doing
dude and he said you do as I say not as
I do and that was the defining parable
of my childhood
don't ever be that guy and so I kind of
grew up with that philosophy you you
lead by doing you lead by example and
you lead the way
and so when I years into my practice I
became very I was almost 300 pounds Wow
I was pre-diabetic all my inflammatory
markers were getting crazy and one day I
remember I've been over to tie my shoe
and got short of breath and I was
already starting to see the looks in
inpatient rooms you know when I'd be
counseling a patient who was overweight
and I'd be telling them you know the
American Diabetes Association died or
join Weight Watchers or Jenny Craig
and I kept noticing the glance down at
my Dunlap I don't know if you know what
that is or not been in the South happens
when your belly done lapped over your
belt right and so I'm like yeah I can't
be that guy I can't I can't go in there
tell you Tom you gotta lose weight man
when it looks like my water's about to
break so then what was that first step
and so I climbed up in the attic got
down all my nutrition notes from from
medical school and you might envision
this these you know me coming down with
this Pocari Asst tomes and stacks and it
was actually about this much there's a
small paperback book and a half semester
worth of notes and so I went through all
that and I'm like maybe I forgot
something right and to sum up what I was
taught med school it was 8 lots of
whole-grain avoid saturated fat and jog
and so monk ok so I started doing that
and I did it faithfully for a month
month and a half and gained another five
or ten pounds and so at that point
doctors have this thing they always
think their patients are secretly
non-compliance I got to tell you joined
the gym stopped eating Cheetos but
secretly I know you're in the bedroom
eating the honey bun and you're not
getting on the treadmill right and so
but the problem was I knew I had been
doing it doctor I wasn't fooling anybody
I was with me I knew that I was jogging
a mile a day and I knew I was eating
zero saturated fat and eating multiple
servings of whole grains and eating lots
of fresh fruit and I was gaining weight
and my numbers were getting worse and I
said ok so obviously I don't know a damn
thing about human nutrition and so I
went back to the drawing board and and
kind of stepped outside of my box and
started reading books that we weren't
given in medical school and that that
was kind of the beginning of it all
that's really interesting to me that you
were able to look at that and say well I
guess I don't know or understand this so
how do you stay so open minded and how
do you stay open minded now or do you I
guess like you obviously have a pretty
hardcore vision of what's working now
things that work for you things that are
working for your patients how do you
stay open-minded now as you learn more
and more
well I'm constantly reading and
researching and looking and I'm weird in
the way that I'm happy to be proven
wrong I don't have a problem with
at all I've already been proven wrong on
my initial you know what I thought was
right and so if someone comes along with
something better then I'm happy to
listen because my progress kind of
followed circuitous path and so it was
kind of a natural progression from Paleo
ancestral to primal to low carb high
healthy fat and then ultimately taquito
and then for the last eight months I've
been almost exclusively carnivore and
that that's actually been for me the
penultimate step of my health I've never
felt this good and had numbers this good
alright well we're gonna get to that
first I've heard you talk about how
we've ended up here and that's something
that I find utterly fascinating so how
did the medical establishment end up
preaching with a straight face whole
grains and all of that stuff well it
there's several things that kind of came
together all at the same time we had the
the the misleading research by Ansel
keys and then we had all of the big food
corporations and we had all this wheat
and we had all this corn and so they had
to sell that and so it's almost like we
created the perfect storm of big
medicine Big Pharma and big food all
coming together all three making
billions in profit but everybody getting
sicker because of it but not sicker
quickly enough for it to throw up a red
flag because if I put strychnine in your
water obviously that was immediately bad
right but if I just slowly poison you
and it takes 20 years nobody's the wiser
and so that's kind of how the chronic
inflammation of the the stupid American
diet has come to a head and now we have
this other great thing called the the
Internet right and so anybody can
virtually look up any research study and
so when a doctor says all the research
shows that that you know saturated fat
leads directly to heart disease now
there are people they can print out
every single study that has those
keywords in it and look at it and go
where I don't see it anywhere where is
it ads I see hints of it and I say
you know tiny relative risk values in
observational research but where's the
definitive study that says in this
control study we show without doubt that
elites to be you eat a lot of saturated
fat you get heart disease the ends it
that study doesn't exist and so now the
cats kind of out of the bag because
anybody can look this stuff up and you
don't have to Google many words until
you understand exactly what that studies
saying talk to me about questioning
things so how do people and obviously
you encourage people heavily in your
book to begin to question things and
understand things and be their own
advocate what does that process look
like so the one thing that even I
struggle with when I'm beginning a new
topic is I don't know who the hell to
listen to and you're gonna get a lot of
conflicting voices and the good and the
bad of the Internet is you can find
anything but anyone can also post
anything and so you get you know a lot
of conflicting information do you have a
way that you walk your patients through
how to begin to discern fact from
fiction most of the time they've already
done the trial and error research before
they get to me just because I tend to
attract that kind of patient people who
are proactive who have a plan who want
to get better and then it also comes
down to the N equals one of tried on
yourself and you know anybody who says
oh you shouldn't eat an all meat diet
for a month that's that's gonna hurt you
obviously human beings we've been doing
that for millennia that's not gonna hurt
you to try that for a month it doesn't
work move on to something else
try vegan for a month see what that does
there's enough people who've done that
enough times that's not a dangerous
proposition and so if you were going to
if if somebody wanted to do an nf1
protocol which I am so into and that's
really become my obsession with dealing
with Lisa's illness and realizing that
all the literature in the world like
it'll take you down a path that maybe
works for some distribution of the bell
curve but when you get down to that one
individual person different things react
differently but doing an N of one well
is actually pretty difficult so what do
you suggest do you strip people down to
say all the way down to a carnivore diet
then you build back in or do you taper
them down slowly to pull them off of
sugar
like what what is your end of one
protocol look like yeah most people
start out with just eliminating the
obvious culprits and so we are will get
rid of all sugars even organic locally
sourced honey and agave nectar that's
organic will be you know and people
think well that's got to be good right
no that's pure sugar and so we get rid
of all sugars that's step one and then
we get rid of all grains that's step two
and then step three is to get rid of all
vegetable oils and so for most people
with olive oil well not olive oil is
good it's naturally oily right you don't
have to chemically Express the oil but
more like seed oils like canola like
soybean the the oils that have to go to
the chemical factory to become oil and
so usually almost always those three
steps are gonna make people feel better
they're gonna feel better and that's
feeling better than you felt in years
that's motivation to go okay now I'm
really I'm feeling great I want to feel
even better what's the next step and
then that would vary for different
people depending on what conditions they
had and where they're from the in the
world or their ancestors have lived for
the last hundred thousand years how much
they're willing to give up versus what
kind of compromises they want to make so
many variables come into play and that's
why they call it practice even if
something is completely natural like a
local organic naturally sourced honey
right from the comb you're biting into
it yourself like why do you have them
strip up that I think a lot of people
believe in natural and I believe in
natural but what we have to do is we
have to make our diet as ancestrally
appropriate as we possibly can because
human beings have been on this planet as
homo sapiens sapiens for about 200,000
250,000 years and in that time we ate
lots of certain foods and you can go
back and you can look at the the
nitrogen and carbon dating and you can
pretty much figure out what different
peoples ate in different parts of the
world and so we know that at no time in
history did people live on 300 grams of
carbs a day or 350 grams or even more a
day like we do in modern society that
never
happened the vast majority of humans on
the planet ate lots of fatty meat they
would eat some veggies there on purpose
or if they couldn't get fatty meat and
then once a year they would eat some
berries and maybe some fruit depending
on what latitude of the world you lived
in right and if you live far enough
north or far enough south you didn't
even eat you didn't even eat that in the
summer just didn't grow and then maybe
once a year if you lived in the right
part of the world you'd find a honey
tree and oh yeah the entire tribe would
wear that tree out right and they would
lay around in a sugar coma for three
days but that happened once every year
or two
that wasn't an everyday thing but now
we're trying to tell people you know the
powers that be the actual nutrition
authorities are trying to tell people
yeah you need to eat 50 grams of
carbohydrates per meal three times a day
and then three snacks in between with 10
to 20 grams of carbohydrates in each
snack and so I think that's ancestrally
very inappropriate and that's what's
going to lead to the to the inflammation
to the the chronically elevated blood
glucose the chronically elevated insulin
levels the inflammation in the disease
so I think a way into that to get people
to understand how it can cause such a
metabolic disconnect is what you say
about milk and I've never heard anybody
talk is directly about milk as you do so
walk us through how much milk should
people be eating why or why not
and so you have to understand my my
context I grew up being a milk baby when
I was playing three sports in high
school I would drink a gallon of milk a
day okay because I was taught that
that'll make you strong that'll make you
a better an athlete right and of course
it was 2% milk because I didn't need too
much saturated fat that's all my my
grandmother would buy for me and so this
comes from a guy that used to live on
milk that I still love milk but I have
immediate symptoms now being a zone
inflamed as I am now if I had a glass of
milk immediately I start to have the
throat clearing in the heartburn and
after several days the dandruff and the
and the acne everything would start to
come back and I've actually experimented
with that it's like yeah definitely I
don't need to drink milk and so there
are three macronutrients in milk
there's the saturated fat there are
there's the proteins and then there's
the sugar right the like
and so milk its primary purpose is to
take a newborn helpless mammal and help
it gain weight and grow as quickly as
possible that's the purpose of milk it's
not to help you lose weight as we've
been told it's not to help you make
muscles though it's it is to help you
gain weight as quickly as possible for
that particular species right and so the
proteins for many many people are
inflammatory even either a little bit or
substantial amount and so you get this
inflammation because you're drinking a
protein that's not really the protein
that that's made for human beings and
then you have the saturated fat which
we've all been taught to fear but which
in the end which is going to turn out to
be the thing you need to worry about the
least that's actually the good part of
milk and so I still use dairy in my diet
but I only use full fat cheese butter
ghee maybe a little heavy cream and the
my logic for that is is that all of the
lactose has been removed from a full fat
cheese because the microbe that turned
it from milk to cheese ate up all the
sugar that's what it was after and so it
but then in the process it also
denatures the protein so it changes the
physical shape of the the protein and
making it much less inflammatory and
then of course it's full fat so I've got
all that good saturated fat which is
what is good for me and so that's why I
think full fat dairy
nothing less fatty than heavy cream is
probably not that bad for most people
but you mentioned the bell curve earlier
and there is a distribution out on the
tail who can't even drink heavy cream
there's still too much inflammatory
protein even in heavy cream for them
yeah the the inflammation that's really
interesting to me and it seems like a
preponderance of the stuff that you talk
about is really designed to lower
inflammation one I'd like to know why so
much the standard American diet causes
inflammation like at a at a cellular
level what's going on and then to what
are some like quick biomarkers that
people should be working with their
doctor to track to see if they're
trending in the right direction
so anytime you feed an animal something
that's not a part of its natural diet
it's going to get sick
it's going to get inflammation it's it's
gonna it's going to not feel good it's
not a not going to perform as well and
that that's true for dogs that's true
for horses that's true for humans and so
veterinary sciences is much advanced
over medical science if you have a sick
dog and you go to the vet one of the
very first things he's going to ask you
is what have you been feeding this dog
mmm right because that matters that's a
big deal and so if you've been feeding
this dog a vegan diet
that's what's wrong with the dogs stop
feeding him something that he's not
supposed to eat and the same holds true
for humans only for the last few hundred
years have we been eating grains in the
quantity that we eat now and you know
we've been cultivating grains for ten or
twelve thousand years but just because
we were cultivating grain ten thousand
years ago doesn't mean we were having 11
servings a day of grain back then like
we're supposed to have now right
according to the official guidelines and
then also some experts would argue that
the grain we have today is not the same
grain of a thousand years ago or 5,000
years ago that it's it's not necessary
even if it hasn't been genetically
modified it's been crossbred enough
times that it's essentially a different
species of grain and so we just haven't
had enough evolutionary time to adapt to
it and to get used to it let's put a
let's dig deeper on that so what would
we be crossbreeding for obviously
palatability it would be one but so is
it increasingly high in gluten like what
is it that we're putting into it that
makes it hyper palatable that becomes
this increasing problem I think there's
there's a much higher percentage of
gluten and I think there are there
several other inflammatory proteins that
are in much higher concentrations now
than they were hundreds of years ago and
then back to you know a thousand years
ago you ground your wheat between two
big rocks and so it was it was barely
processed and now we grind it up into
the finest powder imaginable which makes
it hyper palatable it makes it easy to
eat a lot of it and you don't have to
really do any work to eat it and then if
it is inflammatory for your system which
I think it is for most humans the
surface area contacted by the tiny
articles of wheat is much much greater
than the surface area that would be
contacted internally with the more
coarse ground wheat of the past that's
interesting and are you talking about
that from a permeability standpoint yeah
well yeah absolutely and so much of
grain isn't is insoluble fiber right you
can't digest it at all your bacteria
might might use some of it in the in the
large bowel but as far as you digesting
a lot of it you can't right and so but
when you grind it up into the finest
powder imaginable then your body's more
able to assimilate even more of it and
you wind up with more of an inflammatory
shock because you're able to absorb more
of it
it's really interesting I want to go
back to what you said about veterinarian
medicine being ahead of human medicine
and that they lead with what are you
eating
why do you think that's the case it's
actually really interesting to me
because it makes good sense but usually
he's a standalone guy he doesn't have a
bevy of specialist specialists you know
at the hospital vet hospitals and so he
has to kind of think holistically about
the animal and globally about the animal
he can't ignore their diets because you
know most farmers are not gonna tolerate
putting their their dog or their horse
no matter what a thoroughbred they are
on five six seven eight nine ten twenty
four prescription medications and so a
vet's job is to fix the animal not
medicate the animal and so I think that
they just they come at it from a
different perspective and therefore they
give different results I think it
conspiracy theorists II which is not my
normal bent but how much of this the
problem in the standard American diet is
a problem of systems that's maybe a
weird word but I mean in that you've got
you said their job is to fix the animal
not medicate the animal how much in
what's happening in humans is that we
are on a intention or otherwise a system
of medicating people and then one thing
you said about Ancel keys that I found
really really interesting was that he
was a bully and that he would actually
if people challenged him he would shut
them down and so people stopped
challenging him because it would end up
damaging their career and sort of
accidentally created this massive
knock-on effect of nobody challenging
the thinking yeah
how much of what we're dealing with now
is related to a bunch of weird sort of
systemic things well it really is kind
of the perfect storm of Ancel keys
research and you know he wasn't an MD he
wasn't no he was not a medical doctor at
all but he did this huge research study
in which he took it he collected data
from 22 countries as you probably know
but he only published the data from 7
countries and that's why it's called the
7 country study but he just cherry
picked the data because he he believed
in a vegetable heavy diet he believed
that eating animal products was
inherently either bad or unhealthy and
so since his research was not really
peer-reviewed in any meaningful way
since it wasn't double-blinded since it
wasn't randomized his bias slipped right
into the research and that's one of the
system things that is is our our current
nutritional research is terrible because
of those very things most of the studies
are observational in nature most of them
use a food frequency questionnaire and
they'll ask you questions like how many
cups of ribs have you eaten in the last
three months or how many pounds of
broccoli have you eaten in the last
three months who could possibly answer
that in any meaningful way and so you
and so if the researcher has a bias it's
it's human nature it's not a conspiracy
it's just human nature if you believe
something and there's nobody looking
over your shoulder your belief is gonna
seep into your work but the problem is
is that a lot of the schools of
nutrition and a lot of the medical
schools still cite that research
routinely as gospel and so until enough
people know better than that and stop
doing that
that research with his inherent bias is
going to keep slipping into the medical
recommendations and that's just one of
the many systems that that I think
you're broken that have to be fixed
before we can be a healthy people again
and what is fixed to look like so what
did you do to yourself what do you teach
your patients so you got to get rid of
all the sugars you got to get rid of all
the grains you got to get rid of all the
vegetable oils or the seed oils and then
for some people that's it that's all
they need
at that point their body the
inflammation gets better their markers
at what markers are alright so you
there's a there's a bevy of them and
different experts kind of have their own
favorites but you could look at a riff
retire through site sedimentation rate
you could look at a CRP which you can
have a high sensitivity or cardiac or
just a regular CRP which is C reactive
protein you can look at home with 16
levels you can look at ferritin levels
you can look at all these different
markers and and the problem is is we
haven't done this enough for long enough
to really know which ones are the very
best right some people look at
fibrinogen there are all these other
markers that were still kind of
experimenting with because everybody's
been so busy prescribing pills they
haven't been looking at hey what's the
best marker for inflammation so I can
know I'm having a meaningful effect on
this human but most people when they do
step one two and three and then start
playing around with some of the other
steps they can do they feel so much
better that they don't care what the lab
say they're like no dude I haven't felt
this great in 10 years and that's not to
say you never can have sugar or grains
or you know any kind of oil again but
that needs to be a rare treat just like
it was 50,000 years ago but if you do
that every single day with snacks in
between you're gonna suffer what do you
think about constant glucose monitoring
I think it's I think you I think that's
gonna turn the tide on a lot of the
recommendations that endocrinologist
give their patients it's gonna turn the
tide on the the the recommendations and
advice that registers dietitians give
their patients because currently
patients will check their blood sugar
once or twice a day and so I was
pre-diabetic
my a once II was six I was moving that
way right but if you checked a fasting
blood sugar on me back then it would
have been normal and so unless you
chancing why was your fasting you know I
hadn't eaten overnight and so my blood
sugar would come back down so you're
saying you didn't have a physiological
metabolic problem you had a purely diet
based problem almost all of mine was was
just died and self-inflicted dietary
damage right and so there are millions
of pre-diabetics living their life in
them in the United States today who have
no
dia because once a year their doctor
checked they only check the only marker
of glucose and insulin metabolism that
he'll check is a fasting blood sugar and
if that's all you check your blind and
so when you check a fasting blood sugar
and it's 90 all you know is that that
moment in time this person's blood
Sugar's normal that's literally all that
tells you it doesn't tell you anything
about the past it doesn't tell you about
their average but when you check an a1c
and 7.4 oh my god you're a diabetic and
if I hadn't checked that I wouldn't see
I would have no damn idea and I would
have said all everything looks great mr.
bill y'all see you next year and that
happens every single day in doctors
offices across the country and across
the world we check a fasting blood sugar
it's normal or it's maybe a little bit
high right a few points I had not a big
deal we'll watch it we'll check it again
next year and then you get to enjoy
another year of damage being done to
every tissue organ and cell of your body
because any time your blood Sugar's high
you're doing permanent damage they
cannot be taken back explain that to me
so here's why I think that people
gravitate towards cholesterol they have
this picture of there are pipes in my
body and those pipes get clogged and get
clogged with cholesterol don't eat
cholesterol right right and that's like
the visual representation is so easy
yeah so why is elevated blood sugar
problem what damage is it doing to the
tissues so your body's made to run on a
blood sugar from 60 to 99 and if you eat
a veritable feast it might get up to 110
115 maybe 120 but that's about as high
as a normal person with normal glucose
metabolism back when I was 20 I could
have eaten a dozen donuts and drank half
a gallon of milk which I did on several
occasions and my blood sugar an hour
later would have been 110 Wow because
back then I was so young and
metabolically healthy my body could take
it but if you can grab that glucose out
of so I had I had some muscle in so my
my insulin level would spike and it
would put all the glucose out of the
bloodstream very quickly now that's not
to say that was healthy it just I was so
young and metabolically resilient it's
relieving why isn't why would you say
that's not healthy then what is the is
it an insulin problem the heart of your
pancreas has to work the higher your
insulin level is
and so we know for without doubt that
chronically high glucose levels in the
blood damage every tissue every organ in
your body but it looks like that
chronically high insulin level also does
damage and the damage look like like I
don't so I've heard the analogy that
having too high blood glucose you're
literally burning the tissues but it's
one of those like if I were on national
TV I wouldn't want to repeat that
something really know what I mean right
it's actually much more complicated than
that but that's a pretty good analogy
but what happens is all every tissue in
your body is fed by tiny blood vessels
right called arterioles and then down
into the capillary level and when the
blood sugar gets high it causes
inflammation and then the chronically
high insulin is well is going to inflame
those it's going to damage those and
they'll start to close off and so if you
close off one little tiny capillary in
your retina you won't be able to tell
that at all but if you close off one a
day within 20 years you're gonna be
going to the docs and doctor I can't I
don't know something's wrong with my
eyes I can't see good but and so you've
got 20 years of damage it's too late at
that point
but the tiny blood vessels that's what's
being damaged and so when you're when
your retina or when you're bright if I
part of your brain or when your penis
loses its good blood supply it stops
working and that's a problem and so for
years we were taught that you know if
you're type 2 diabetic you're just not
making enough insulin turns out that's
complete rubbish because we can check a
lab called a c-peptide which tells me
exactly how much insulin your pancreas
is producing when your pancreas when the
beta cells in your pancreas make insulin
they make a pre pro insulin which is 2
insulins and a c-peptide stuck together
and then when you excrete that the
c-peptide breaks off and we currently
say it doesn't do anything but think
about that
that's ridiculous it absolutely does
thinks what we should be saying is we
don't know what that does yet but it
does something but insulin is constantly
fluctuating in your system and so you
can't check just a spot insulin because
if you've just eaten if you haven't
eaten all those things that if you're
under stress if you're sick that all
those things affect your insulin levels
and so checking just a spot insulin
doesn't really give you much information
but I can your c-peptide levels stay
pretty constant in your blood around the
clock and so when I check a spot
c-peptide and it's elevated that tells
me without doubt your pancreas is having
to work too hard to make insulin to put
the blood sugar out of this bloodstream
right and so where does it put it it
pushes it out of the serum out of the
bloodstream into the cells and so what
we used to say is oh the the locking key
mechanism of the insulin somehow it's
gummed up your insulin can't let the
blood sugar into the cell but jason fung
a nephrologist said this very elegantly
basically the cells are already full of
sugar because of the orange juice and
pancakes and bowl of fruit you have for
breakfast right and so then when you
come along and you have lunch you know
two two sandwiches four slices of holy
bread now you've got all this more
glucose your insulin level spikes even
more trying to push it into the cells
the cells don't have any room they're
full of glucose and so your blood sugar
starts to stay high and that's the
beginning of pre-diabetes and type 2
diabetes that's really interesting is it
true that cells will actually reduce the
number of insulin receptors that they
have to begin basically saying handful
and eventually they will kind of become
insulin resistant but that is a start
out that way
and so like when I was 20 I could eat
that dozen donuts and I a it would just
push it all into the cells even though
that wasn't good for the cells it still
kept my blood sugar down it's really
interesting in I am I literally have no
idea the answer this question but it's
putting the glucose into the cells
because the cell is simply storing it or
because the cell can actually use it as
but will right then and there both yeah
that's interesting which is why I'm
guessing correct me if I'm wrong that
exercising can actually wildly impacts
or your likelihood of becoming diabetic
are having diabetics in that's exactly
right using and then actually actually
doing some exercise before you eat can
open the muscles and they can accept
much more of the glucose out of your
bloodstream and so a lot of people use
that as a hack if they know they're
going to grandmother's house or going to
the buffet they'll work out right before
they go or they'll do something that Tim
Ferriss talks about in his book the
4-hour body though
go to the bathroom and they'll do 20 50
100 bathroom stall squats and that opens
up all your muscles and then you can
pretty much eat whatever you want to I'm
not recommending that by the way but
that is that is a useful hack for some
people if you know that you're gonna be
in a social situation where you're gonna
have to eat or you're gonna hurt
granny's feelings or you know you're
gonna look weird if you're just standing
there drinking water while everybody
else has a buffet plate you can sneak
off to the bathroom and do your stall
squats and then you you're not gonna
spike your blood sugar and therefore
you're not going to spike your insulin
because the muscles are ready for that
glucose that's really really interesting
what are some of the biggest myths that
are still being perpetuated today that
really piss you off well there's a list
of them so where do you want to start
what subject let's start with vitamin D
yeah sun exposure specifically right and
so there's the vitamin D issue with with
breastfeeding moms that then that's one
of the very first lies and so let's talk
about okay I'm an intern I've just
graduated med school I'm an intern I'm
on my obstetrics rotation and so the the
chief resident who's in his third year
of residency would say okay don't forget
to write the vitamin D drops for the
breastfeeding babies and I'm like what
are you talking about he's like well
humans don't make vitamin D in their
breast milk and so immediately that
struck me I'm like okay so for the last
200,000 years we've not became extinct
because of rickets because human mothers
don't produce vitamin D in their breast
milk what and that was a media huge red
flag for me but I didn't have
time to research it at the time so I
filed that away somewhere and then later
after I just started my practice I
researched that I looked into it and
they found that if you give a
breastfeeding mother 6060 400
international units of vitamin D a day
guess what she does she makes all the
vitamin D in her breast milk that a baby
needs and so if the mothers deficient in
vitamin D then she doesn't produce
vitamin D under breast milk Wow but if
you if she's getting the vitamin D that
she would have gotten a hundred thousand
years ago from being out outside all day
and for meeting all kinds of grass-fed
fats you know fatty meat the yolks from
eggs any fat that she could get her
hands on brains then she would be
getting all this vitamin D and she would
produce more than enough vitamin D for
her baby and so absolutely women can
make vitamin D in their breast milk if
they are not deficient in vitamin D
themselves which women are capable of
doing if you'll feed them the
ancestrally appropriate human diet and
let them go play in the Sun yeah let's
talk about the Sun so people obviously
believe that the Sun causes skin cancer
is a lot of interesting research coming
out now talking about how if you double
apply sunscreen you're more likely to
get skin cancer than if you only apply
it once what what's your thinking around
the sunscreen and skin cancer yeah the
research about that that that proves
that sun exposure increases your risk of
skin cancer is just atrocious and then
when you think about this some of the
research is done on donated foreskins so
when we circumcise a baby that they
would collect the foreskins and then
they would do in vitro research on the
foreskin skin with ultraviolet light and
then they would make they would make
recommendations for you as an adult
human because you know foreskin doesn't
get a lot of Sun anyway and then you're
making global recommendations based on
that kind of research that's the kind of
research that we get this from but then
when you think about this topic common
sense wise and ancestrally we would be
extinct as a species if sun exposure
cause skin cancer and melanoma that
rights that we're currently having your
skin is built of something it's built of
what you've eaten over the last nine to
twelve months that's what your skin is
made of right now is what you ate over
the last year and so if you've eaten
crap for the last year you want to bet
me that you're at increased risk of skin
cancer sure you are then there's also
this thing called diagnosis drift that I
talk about in the book as well when you
take off a non cancerous skin lesion you
get paid about this equivalent as you
get paid for an office visit but if it's
precancerous you get paid about three
times that much
if it's cancerous you get paid anywhere
from ten to a hundred times as much to
remove that guess who diagnoses it the
doctor that's removing it now we've got
human nature at play again right and so
in so it's called diagnosis drift if you
get paid more for it to be a more
dangerous lesion than it's human nature
guess what it's going to be a more
dangerous lesion more often and so a lot
of the increased cancer rate is
diagnosis drift a lot of it is from our
terrible diet that we're trying to build
skin out of that's really interesting so
what do you think is happening at the
cellular level based on what I'm eating
that would cause that particular cell to
become cancerous like as it damaged fats
like what so every cell membrane in your
body has to have cholesterol to function
properly and so when we tell everybody
you got to eat less cholesterol and I'm
gonna put you on this pillow to lower
your cholesterol even lower and I won't
you eat lots of whole grains and I want
you to use canola oil because if you use
bacon grease that's going to give you a
heart attack right and so when you're
using basically what amounts to
artificial fat instead of real fats
you're building inferior cell membranes
and so every cell in your body is an
increased risk of something bad and in
the skin that could wind up being eczema
can wind up being psoriasis it can wind
up being one of the skin cancers oh that
yeah that is crazy you are what you eat
is such a powerful and it sounds like a
truism but it is it's absolutely a fact
let's talk about a true carnivore diet
first of all what made you want to go
that far and then what does a carnivore
diet look like is it just i eat beef or
is it organ meats and all that stuff so
I had I had kind of come from standard
American diet to primal paleo to low
carb high healthy fat taquito and on
keto I was eating a ton of fatty meat
and a little bit of vegetables and and I
enjoy green vegetables but then I kept
you know I'm always researching I'm
always looking and studying and I saw
this excellent lecture by dr. Michael
EADS he was talking about me
and what they ate and Neanderthals were
were exclusively carnivore unless they
couldn't get meat and then they would
eat whatever of course but if they could
get fatty meat that's all they ate they
didn't need anything else and about that
same time Nisha and I my wife we checked
our 23andme data and when he got it back
I had more than the and earth all DNA
than 97% of the population oh and so it
was just kind of fortuitous they did
though both those things happen at the
same time and I was like you normally
try for a month what book could it hurt
and so at the end of that month I felt
so much better I'd lost another 4 pounds
people were saying what do you you look
better you've lost weight like they can
see the the even-even from quito to
carnivore my inflammation was even
better I felt better I used to have
terrible heartburn every day every day
even with paleo primal when I went keto
was about 80% better but then when a
carnivore I have zero heartburn ever
break down carnivore for me are you
eating chicken I don't eat much chicken
my carnivore is lots of fatty red meat
mostly beef I I eat eggs mostly the
yolks
I'll leave butter or ghee some full fat
cheese salt pepper and some spices
that's that's the entirety of my diet
and that may sound boring but I have yet
to sit down and go damn it another
ribeye it just doesn't happen now for me
that sounds amazing right you're gonna
die of heart attack right right right
and so a my cholesterol currently is 350
my LDL Oster all is 250 and I'm not
worried about those at all because more
and more the research that's been
shelved and put in the basements and put
in the attics about lipid and you know
cholesterol and LDL now that all the
research is becoming available and
people are doing review articles and
looking at all the data it actually
looks like the higher your total
cholesterol is the longer you live and
so the entire model has been upside down
this entire time so I'm not worried
about my total cholesterol or my LDL at
all but
yeah my HDL is very high which is my
good protective cholesterol my
triglycerides are very low my hemoglobin
a1c or my 3-month blood sugar average is
the lowest it's been since I've been
checking it all my inflammatory markers
are back to normal I feel great
so tell me where's the risk in that okay
that's super interesting walk me through
what parts of the the cholesterol
numbers people should be caring about
not caring about because so in my own
life I went through a period that lasted
probably for about two and a half years
where I was essentially doing rabbit
starvation right so I was eating
basically chicken breast broccoli
nothing on it no oil nothing
I know amazing I felt terrible exactly
absolutely horrifying right but damn I
was lean you know and it was amazing but
yeah I was I had joint pain just was
like in pure insanity yeah and then I
because I heard that ketogenic spa see
had some cancer prevention stuff I tried
it and it was like it was like taking a
drug it was so anti-inflammatory on my
joints that I was like well I'm never
going back to rabid starvation
that was crazy right but my cholesterol
levels were so low when I was doing the
rabbit starvation and I thought that was
a good thing that I was super amped I
felt bulletproof thought I was gonna
live forever then when I started doing
ketogenic s-- my numbers went
significantly up and my doctor was like
we have to get you on Lipitor and I was
like you must be joking I've got two
guns Tom I've got a 12-gauge shotgun and
I've got a BB gun you're gonna get shot
with one of them which one do you pick
take to be beyond the fact that that's
it and that's that makes good sense
and so my contention is is that an
elevated a1c an elevated c-peptide which
tells me your blood sugar and serum
insulin levels are always high a very
low HDL in a very high triglyceride
level those four tests those that's the
shotgun if you're LD
is 250-300 that might might be a BB gun
but the the even the research on levels
that HEIs completely inconclusive if
your doctor says oh you have a high
total cholesterol you need to be on
lipitor you need to find a new doctor
because he's at least 10 years behind in
his reading okay
now if he talks about LDL then he's at
least current but still when you look at
the research and its totality it's not a
risk factor it might be a BB gun but
it's not the shotgun that that high
blood sugar high insulin low HDL and
high triglycerides are that's the
shotgun that's gonna kill you hmm it's a
really interesting so talk about salt
blood pressure seems to be a lot of
misunderstanding around salt yeah and so
human beings and all mammals really love
salt and crave salt but in human beings
we consider this a character flaw if you
if you like salt and actually eat it
something wrong with you you're not
you're not very bright or you just don't
care about your health but what about
the deer in the wild that will walk four
miles to lick a certain mud or a certain
rock that has a high salt content are
they are they gluttons as well or they
just don't care about their health I
doubt that's true I think they're doing
that for their health the blood of
mammals is very salty okay if you if you
if I check a basic metabolic panel on
you your sodium level is going to be one
one thirty five your chloride level is
going to be 110 right your magnesium
which we all want to talk about it's
going to be two point five and your
potassium that we all want to talk about
it's going to be three you see the
difference in those levels your blood is
meant to be very very salty if you have
normal kidney function then you
effectively can't overdose on salt your
kidneys can excrete so much sodium and
chloride that it's ridiculous okay your
kidneys are not gonna let you keep too
much salt in your body even the research
in people with with late end-stage heart
failure they do worse on a salt
restricted diet and you think that's the
very people you so they should really be
restricting their salt and doctors tell
them to do that every day
but when you actually look
the research they do worse on a low salt
diet than a normal salt diet if you
start to mess with the salt and try to
lower that immediately your cell
membranes stop functioning properly
because the sodium and the chloride are
supremely important for proper cell
function if you are limiting your salt
you're limiting your performance and
there are actually athletes who instead
of carb loading they'll salt load before
they workout but and it increases their
their endurance and their strength by
1015 percent I've never heard them do it
speak really interesting I'm a long time
salt junkie I used to eat
rock salt if you've ever had that I'm
guessing where you grew up you have sure
you see rock salt I got nosebleeds
there's just something about salt one
more thing what do you think the
carnivore diet is doing to your
microbiome like oh there is there
anything to think through there in terms
of the microbiota that are feeding off
of greens and I think that's a huge
hugely important question I think the
the gut microbiome is a completely
unknown entity but what I do know is
that the multiple carnivores that I
correspond with have no problem in the
bathroom there's no problem with
constipation with diarrhea everything
works like a charm there's no problem
with that and so all their markers are
good and so we go back to that again
they feel great and they look great in
the lab so where's the problem right now
I'm not at all discounting the gut
microbiota I think it's a huge deal and
so I think that probably in starvation
situations when we're having to live on
you know grass and and and grains and
stuff I think that we can use the gut
microbiome to help make fatty acids and
to help make other nutrients but when
you're feeding the body wood it needs
which is mostly fatty meat and maybe a
little bit of edge you don't even really
need the gut bacteria to do that work
for you because you got it very very
interesting before I asked my last
question tell these guys where they can
find you online so I do most of my work
on YouTube I have a few youtube videos
you can check
if you just search dr. ken berry you'll
find me and then I do a lot of work on
Facebook and Instagram the same search
ought to turn me up love it alright my
last question what's the one thing that
people can do that will have the biggest
impact on their health the one thing you
can do is to realize that you are
literally made of what you eat and then
to go back in time mentally and think
what did we eat 10,000 years ago what do
you eat a hundred thousand years ago
because your DNA has not changed at all
since then you are the same creature
that used to roam the Savannah 100
thousand years ago you are the same
genetic animal you have to eat the food
that they ate or you will suffer and
when you start eating processed grains
and processed sugars and processed
vegetable oils at the amounts that we
currently eat that's going to lead to
nothing but chronic disease amazing
thank you so much waiting on the show
that was incredible all right all right
guys the most fascinating thing about
this man is he is blunt as all hell when
you dive in his world you're gonna
realize very quickly that he's not
pulling punches he wants people to
question everything he wants you being
your own advocate for your health diving
in he talks a lot about building a
bottom-up approaches looking at what's
going on in the world seeing how people
are reacting seeing what people are
talking about in the age of the internet
do not wait for the medical
establishment to hand you something down
chances are that it's outdated or it was
influenced by something else so really
being a part of figuring things out on
your own and researching and learning
that stuff is the way to go and what I
love about him and it's why it was one
of the very first things we talked about
is never afraid to admit if he realized
he was wrong about something to say he
said many times oh I used to you know
tell people to do this and and I was
wrong about that and I'm really sorry
and now this is my current thinking and
anybody that's willing to evolve their
thinking like that and change the way
that they approach something that's
somebody that I feel that I can trust
because they're not hemmed in by their
own Dogma by the things that they've
said which i think is a major trap so he
is a very fresh voice in the space I
encourage you guys to go hear what he
has to say check it out and like he
would do with anybody else by all means
question what he's saying I think he's
questioning what he's saying so that you
can really build a robust model that
actually works in the
real-world and that's why I'm so
intrigued all right if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care thank you sir my amazing
hey impactive as' I hope you loved that
episode and now I want to take a moment
to introduce you to our awesome friends
at athletic greens athletic greens is
one of the best all in one whole food
supplements out there and as I hope you
guys know from watching the show you
need to fuel yourself with the right
nutrition if you want to be at your best
every day and I'm talking cognitively
psychologically physically all of it
requires absolutely top-notch nutrition
and as you guys know to me the gold
standard is without question eating a
whole food diet whenever humanly
possible but making that a daily reality
is easier said than done and sometimes
you need another great option to getting
your daily nutrition and that is where
athletic greens comes in and I think
they deliver a product that is
absolutely kick-ass I love that these
guys make it easy and efficient for you
to get your daily nutrition when whole
food isn't an option one scoop of this
stuff has 75 high-quality whole food
sourced ingredients and the antioxidant
equivalent of twelve servings of fruits
and vegetables it is easy to tell how
amazing this stuff is by the number of
people that recommend this and I'm
talking high-caliber people in fact a
bunch of impact Theory alums recommend
athletic greens including Tim Ferriss
Peter Diamandis and my close survey so I
want you guys to try this for yourself
and to that end we have a very special
offer for you you're going to get 20
free travel packs and a free mixer
bottle with your first purchase that way
you guys are going to be able to stay on
top of your health at home and on the
road just click on the link in the
description below or visit atletic
greens.com forward slash health theory
to give it a try
that's athletic greens calm /l theory or
click on the link in the description
below and try that special offer out
today enjoy my friends and be legendary
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and
locking your full potential